Updating contributing.md for the monorepo (#19088)
camunda/camunda: CONTRIBUTING.md

# Contributing to Zeebe

> * [Build Zeebe from source](#build-zeebe-from-source)

Reviewer: I would propose to keep "build from source" at one of the first steps / at the top of the page, since this a very foundation to contribute.

Author: @MaxTru, I moved it up higher, but not right at the top. My thinking is that the doc is in order -- first prerequisites for everyone (CLA, CoC) to more specific. Since some may be looking for our Issue guidelines and you don't need to build from source for that (correct me if I'm wrong)-- I put those higher. But let me know if you feel strongly that the build process should be higher up!

# Contributing to Camunda

We welcome new contributions. We take pride in maintaining and encouraging a friendly, welcoming, and collaborative community.

Anyone is welcome to contribute to Camunda! The best way to get started is to choose an existing [issue](#starting-on-an-issue).

> Core code contributions must fit into the scope of Camunda products. The ultimate decision is up to the core Camunda team. If your vision does not fit in the core Camunda product, you may be directed to the [Camunda Community Hub](https://github.com/camunda-community-hub) and/or [Camunda Marketplace](https://marketplace.camunda.com/en-US/home) instead.

Reviewer: Do we really feel this is necessary? It reads a bit deterring to me. It is kind of clear, that Camunda is the maintainer of this repo and will either accept or reject PRs. 

Maybe a simple note (not that prominent) that there is also a community hub would do it as well.

Author: Makes sense, I adjusted this section.

  - [Code of Conduct](#code-of-conduct)
- [GitHub issue guidelines](#github-issue-guidelines)
  - [Starting on an issue](#starting-on-an-issue)
- [Creating a pull request](#creating-a-pull-request)
- [Reviewing a pull request](#reviewing-a-pull-request)
  - [Review emoji code](#review-emoji-code)
  - [Stale pull requests](#stale-pull-requests)
- [Backporting changes](#backporting-changes)
- [Commit message guidelines](#commit-message-guidelines)
  - [Commit message header](#commit-message-header)
  - [Commit message body](#commit-message-body)
- [Build Camunda from source](#build-camunda-from-source)
  - [Test Execution](#test-execution)
    - [Test Troubleshooting](#test-troubleshooting)
  - [Build profiling](#build-profiling)

## Prerequisites
### Contributor License Agreement

You will be asked to sign our [Contributor License Agreement](https://cla-assistant.io/camunda-community-hub/community) when you open a Pull Request. We are not
asking you to assign copyright to us but to give us the right to distribute
your code without restriction. We ask this of all contributors to
assure our users of the origin and continuing existence of the code. 

> *Note: In most cases, you will only need to sign the CLA once.* 

Reviewer 2: 🔧 Pleae use one of [GitHub's markdown alerts](https://github.com/orgs/community/discussions/16925) for notes

```md
> [!NOTE]  
> In most cases, you will only need to sign the CLA once.
```

> [!NOTE]  
> In most cases, you will only need to sign the CLA once.

### Code of Conduct

This project adheres to the [Camunda Code of Conduct](https://camunda.com/events/code-conduct/).
By participating, you are expected to uphold this code. Please [report](https://camunda.com/events/code-conduct/reporting-violations/)

> unacceptable behavior as soon as possible.

Reviewer 2: 🔧 I recommend wrapping lines (i.e. starting new lines) for new sentences only. This nudges authors to rewrite sentences to be shorter which typically leads to simpler text that is easier to read. It also makes it easier to review change in git because it highlights changes by removing and adding individual lines.

Author: I think I fixed the text wrapping in all the spots where it was, but let me know if you spot any other places.

## GitHub issue guidelines
If you want to report a bug or request a new feature, feel free to open a new issue on
[GitHub][issues].

If you report a bug, please help speed up problem diagnosis by
providing as much information as possible. Ideally, that would include a small [sample project][sample] that reproduces the problem.

> :note: If you have a general usage question, please ask on the [forum](forum).

Every issue should have a meaningful name and a description that either
describes:
- A new feature with details about the use case the feature would solve or
improve
- A problem, how we can reproduce it, and what the expected behavior would be
- A change and the intention of how this would improve the system

### Starting on an issue

The `main` branch contains the current in-development state of the project. To work on an issue, follow these steps:

1. Check that a [GitHub issue][issues] exists for the task you want to work on.
   If one does not, create one. Refer to the [issue guidelines](#github-issue-guidelines).

> 2. Check that no one is already working on the issue, and make sure the team would accept a pull request for this topic. Some topics are complex and may touch multiple of [Camunda's cmponents](https://docs.camunda.io/docs/components/), requiring internal coordination.

Reviewer 2: 🔧 Typo

>    git checkout -b 123-adding-bpel-support`

Reviewer 3: @xomiamoore 
❓  remove `` ` ``

```
dist/target/camunda-zeebe-X.Y.Z-SNAPSHOT.tar.gz
dist/target/camunda-zeebe-X.Y.Z-SNAPSHOT.zip
```

This distribution can be containerized with Docker (i.e. build a Docker image) by running:

```
docker build \
  --tag camunda/zeebe:local \
  --build-arg DISTBALL='dist/target/camunda-zeebe*.tar.gz' \
  --target app \
  .
```

This is a small overview of the contents of the different modules:
- `.ci` 
- `.github`
- `.idea`
- `.mvn`
- `authentication`
- `bom` - bill of materials (BOM) for importing Zeebe dependencies
- `build-tools` - Zeebe build tools
- `clients` - client libraries
- `dist` 
- `identity` - component within self-managed Camunda 8 responsible for authentication and authorization
- `licenses`
- `monitor` - Monitoring for self-managed Camunda 8
- `operate` - Monitoring tool for monitoring and troubleshooting processes running in Zeebe
- `parent` - Parent POM for all Zeebe projects
- `qa` 
- `search`
- `service`

> - `spring-boot-starter-sdk` - official SDK for Spring Boot

Author: Updated these, and took out the folders that start with `.`

This is a small overview of the contents of this repository:
- `authentication` - configures authentication for Camunda 8
- `bom` - bill of materials (BOM) for importing Zeebe dependencies
- `build-tools` - Zeebe build tools
- `clients` - client libraries
- `dist` - provides the Camunda 8 distributions
- `identity` - component within self-managed Camunda 8 responsible for authentication and authorization
- `licenses` - the Camunda 8 licenses
- `monitor` - Monitoring for self-managed Camunda 8
- `operate` - Monitoring tool for monitoring and troubleshooting processes running in Zeebe
- `parent` - Parent POM for all Zeebe projects
- `qa` - quality assurance for Camunda 8
- `search` - the search clients for Camunda 8 data
- `service` - internal services for Camunda 8
- `spring-boot-starter-sdk` - official SDK for Spring Boot
- `tasklist` - graphical and API application to manage user tasks in Zeebe
- `testing` - testing libraries for processes and process applications
- `webapps-common` - shared code between the Camunda 8 web apps
- `zeebe` - the process automation engine powering Camunda 8

### Build

> To **quickly** build all components, run the command: `mvn clean install -DskipTests` in the root folder.

Reviewer 2: ❓ Why not recommend `mvn clean install -Dquickly` anymore?

The rest of this section implies that building quickly is typically sufficient unless you want a full distribution. However, the current `mvn clean install -DskipTests` provides a full distribution. Note that the `-Dquickly` flag skips all non-essentials goals like assembly of the distribution artifacts. It's useful during development, but not for those that build from source to use the product.

https://github.com/camunda/camunda/blob/f82906ed9e39a6b3305622c26758eb0cf7e314fb/parent/pom.xml#L232-L265

Reviewer: I agree. Committing this suggestion. @xomiamoore plesae chime in later if there was another reason for this which we don't see at the moment.

> [!NOTE]
> All Camunda core modules are built and tested with JDK 21. Most modules use language level 21, exceptions are: camunda-client-java, camunda-process-test-java, zeebe-bpmn-model, zeebe-build-tools, zeebe-client-java, zeebe-gateway-protocol zeebe-gateway-protocol-impl, zeebe-protocol, and zeebe-protocol-jackson which use language level 8.

For contributions to Camunda, building quickly is typically sufficient. However, users are recommended to build the full distribution.

> To fully build the Camunda distribution and run all tests, run the command: `mvn clean install` in the root folder. This is slightly slower than building quickly but ensures the distribution is assembled completely. The resulting distribution can be found in the folder `dist/target`, i.e.

Reviewer 2: ❓ Why do we recommend running all the tests for building the Camunda distribution? Doesn't it make more sense to split it into the following?
- Building quickly for development: `mvn clean install -Dquickly`
- Building the full distribution for usage (you don't want to run all the tests): `mvn clean install -DskipChecks -DskipTests`
- Building and testing the full distribution: `mvn clean install`

Reviewer: Makes sense! Thanks. Corrected

## Backporting changes

> Some changes need to be copied to older versions. We use the [backport](https://github.com/zeebe-io/backport-action) Github Action to automate this process. Please follow these steps to backport your changes:

Reviewer 2: 🔧 Shameless brag, the backport-action has been moved (already quite some time ago) and exists under https://github.com/korthout/backport-action. We use this specifically:
```suggestion
Some changes need to be copied to older versions. We use the [backport](https://github.com/korthout/backport-action) Github Action to automate this process. Please follow these steps to backport your changes:
```

Good commit messages explain what changed AND why you changed it.
See [I've written a clear changelist description](https://github.com/camunda/camunda/wiki/Pull-Requests-and-Code-Reviews#ive-written-a-clear-changelist-description).

## Contributor License Agreement

You will be asked to sign our Contributor License Agreement when you open a Pull Request. We are not
asking you to assign copyright to us but to give us the right to distribute
your code without restriction. We ask this of all contributors to
assure our users of the origin and continuing existence of the code. You only
need to sign the CLA once.
## Build Camunda from source

## Licenses
Camunda is a multi-module Maven project. To **quickly** build all components,
run the command: `mvn clean install -Dquickly` in the root folder.

Zeebe, Operate, and Tasklist source files are made available under the
[Camunda License Version 1.0](/licenses/CAMUNDA-LICENSE-1.0.txt) except for the parts listed
below, which are made available under the [Apache License, Version

> 2.0](/licenses/APACHE-2.0.txt).  See individual source files for details.

Reviewer 2: ❓ Why was this deleted?

Author: @korthout -- this is also listed in the README, so I thought it'd be easier to keep it up to date in one place vs. two. Open to changing that if you think it should also be listed here.

Author: @korthout, this is also listed in the README, so I thought it'd be easier to keep it up to date in one place vs. two. Open to changing that if you think the licenses should also be listed here.

> > zeebe-gateway-protocol-impl, zeebe-protocol and zeebe-protocol-jackson which use language level 8

Reviewer 2: ❓ Should we also document the JDK requirements for Operate/Tasklist/etc?

Reviewer: @korthout I'd assume that we now be design have the same JDK for the core modules being Zeebe, Operate, Tasklist (and Optimize in the near future). Hence I propose to just state 

```suggestion
> All Camunda core modules are built and tested with JDK 21. Most modules use language level
> 21, exceptions are: zeebe-bpmn-model, zeebe-client-java, zeebe-gateway-protocol,
> zeebe-gateway-protocol-impl, zeebe-protocol and zeebe-protocol-jackson which use language level 8
```

For contributions to Camunda, building quickly is typically sufficient.
However, users of Camunda are recommended to build the full distribution.

To fully build the Zeebe distribution, run the command: `mvn clean install -DskipTests` in the root folder.
This is slightly slower than building quickly but ensures the distribution is assembled completely.

> The resulting Zeebe distribution can be found in the folder `dist/target`, i.e.

Reviewer 2: 🔧 This should probably be adjusted for Camunda's mono repo

Reviewer: 👍 
@xomiamoore maybe you go through the build process yourself, and adjust this accordingly?

Author: @MaxTru @korthout, Are the steps the same as these, or different? I need a bit more context to get started here.

```
dist/target/camunda-zeebe-X.Y.Z-SNAPSHOT.tar.gz
dist/target/camunda-zeebe-X.Y.Z-SNAPSHOT.zip
```

This distribution can be containerized with Docker (i.e. build a Docker image) by running:

```
docker build \

>   --tag camunda/zeebe:local \

Reviewer: Should be adjusted in line with monoRepo changes.

Reviewer: @xomiamoore this is still to be adjusted I think?

- `msgpack-*` is a custom msgpack implementation with extensions to evaluate json-path expressions on msgpack objects
- `dispatcher` is a custom implementation of message passing between threads
- `service-container` is a custom implementation to manage dependencies between different services
- `logstreams` is an implementation of an append-only log backed by the filesystem
- `transport` is our abstraction over network transports
- `gateway` is the implementation of the gRPC gateway, using our SBE-based protocol to communicate with brokers
- `gateway-protocol` contains the gRPC definitions for the Zeebe client-to-gateway protocol
- `zb-db` is our RocksDB wrapper for state management
- `engine`  is the implementation of the event stream processor
- `broker` contains the Zeebe broker which is the server side of Zeebe
- `client-java` contains the Java Zeebe client
- `atomix` contains transport, membership, and consensus algorithms
- `benchmark` contains utilities the team uses to run load tests
- `exporters/elasticsearch-exporter` contains the official Elasticsearch exporter for Zeebe
- `journal` contains the append-only log used by the consensus algorithm

> - `snapshots` abstracts how state snapshots (i.e. `zb-db`) are handled

Reviewer 2: 🔧 Some of these modules have been moved into the `zeebe` subfolder. I suggest we adjust this list of modules to explain the root-level folders, and move the Zeebe module specific ones into a README in the zeebe subfolder

Reviewer: 👍

Author: Moved the Zeebe-specific folders to a Zeebe README, and added what I could to this section. I'm not sure what some folders are or if they need to be explained.
